# ECE374 SP23 HW4

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 5

Given an arbitrary array $A[1:n]$, describe an algorithm to determine in $O(n)$ time whether $A$ contains more than $\frac{n}{4}$ copies of any value. **Do not use hashing, or radix sort, or any other method that depends on the precise input values.**

<br>

## Solution

### **Intuition**
- In a *sorted* array, elements with the same value occupy a contiguous subarray. Such a subarray with length over $\frac{n}{4}$ must cover at least one of the array's three quarters.
- In other words, if there is a value that appears more than $\frac{n}{4}$ times, **it must be among the three quarters**. This also applies to unsorted arrays.

<br>

### **Algorithm**

$\text{IfFrequentValueExists}(A, n) \\
\qquad \text{for } i \leftarrow 1 \text{ to } 3 \\
\qquad \qquad \text{quarter} \leftarrow \text{QuickSelect}(A, \left\lfloor \frac{in}{4} \right\rfloor) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{if } \text{Count}(A, \text{quarter}) > \frac{n}{4} \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \text{return } \text{True} \\
\qquad \text{return } \text{False}$

<br>

### **Runtime Analysis**
- $\text{QuickSelect}(A, k)$ (covered in lecture) finds the $k^{\text{th}}$ smallest element of $A$ in $O(n)$ time. <br>
- $\text{Count}(A, \text{target})$ scans the *unsorted* $A$ and counts the occurrences of $\text{target}$. Evidently, it runs in $O(n)$ time.
- In total, there are **6 calls** to $O(n)$ algorithms regardless of the array's length. Therefore, $\text{IfFrequentValueExists}(A, n)$ runs in $O(n)$ time.
