# ECE374 SP23 HW4

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 2

Consider the following variants of the Towers of Hanoi. For each variant, describe an algorithm to solve it in as few moves as possible. Prove that your algorithm is correct.
- Initially, all the $n$ disks are on $P_1$, and you need to move the disks to $P_2$.
- You are not allowed to put a bigger disk on top of a smaller disk.

**(a)** $\text{Hanoi}_1$: You are forbidden to move any disk directly between $P_1$ and $P_2$. Exactly how many moves does your algorithm make as a function of $n$?

**(b)** $\text{Hanoi}_2$: You are only allowed to move disks from $P_0$ to $P_1$, from $P_1$ to $P_2$, or from $P_2$ to $P_0$. Provide an upper bound, as tight as possible, on the number of moves that your
algorithm uses.

**(c)** $\text{Hanoi}_3$: The largest remaining disk disappears if there is nothing on top of it. The goal is to get all the disks to disappear. Again, provide a tight upper bound on the number of moves.

<br>

## Solution

### **Base Algorithm**

$\text{Hanoi}(n, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \text{if} \ n > 0 \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}(n-1, \text{src}, \text{tmp}, \text{dst}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{MoveOne}(\text{src}, \text{dst}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}(n-1, \text{tmp}, \text{dst}, \text{src})$

***Complexity***

$\begin{aligned}
T(n) &= 2 T(n-1) + 1 \\
T(n) + 1 &= 2 (T(n-1) + 1) \\
T(n) + 1 &= 2^n \\
T(n) &= 2^n - 1
\end{aligned}$

The algorithms are called as $\text{Hanoi}_i(n, P_1, P_2, P_0)$ in all the problem variants. <br>
$\text{src}$, $\text{dst}$, $\text{tmp}$ are parameters instead of specific pegs.

<br>

### **(a)** $3^n - 1$

$\text{Hanoi}_1(n, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \text{if} \ n > 0 \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_1(n-1, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{MoveOne}(\text{src}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_1(n-1, \text{dst}, \text{src}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{MoveOne}(\text{tmp}, \text{dst}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_1(n-1, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp})$

***Complexity***

$\begin{aligned}
T_1(n) &= 3 T_1(n-1) + 2 \\
T_1(n) + 1 &= 3 (T_1(n-1) + 1) \\
T_1(n) + 1 &= 3^n \\
T_1(n) &= 3^n - 1
\end{aligned}$

| Step | $P_1$ | $P_0$ | $P_2$ |
| :--: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 0 | $[1:n]$ | $\emptyset$ | $\emptyset$ |
| 1 | $n$ | $\emptyset$ | $[1:n-1]$ |
| 2 | $\emptyset$ | $n$ | $[1:n-1]$ |
| 3 | $[1:n-1]$ | $n$ | $\emptyset$ |
| 4 | $[1:n-1]$ | $\emptyset$ | $n$ |
| 5 | $\emptyset$ | $\emptyset$ | $[1:n]$ |

***Correctness.*** Moves at the base case are
- $\text{src} \rightarrow \text{tmp} \rightarrow \text{dst}$ (Steps 1, 5)
- $\text{dst} \rightarrow \text{tmp} \rightarrow \text{src}$ (Step 3)

All the moves are legal.

<br>

### **(b)** $O(4^n)$

$\text{Hanoi}_2(n, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \text{if} \ n > 0 \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_2(n-1, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_2(n-1, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}, \text{src}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{MoveOne}(\text{src}, \text{dst}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_2(n-1, \text{tmp}, \text{src}, \text{dst}) \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_2(n-1, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp})$

***Complexity***

$\begin{aligned}
T_2(n) &= 4 T_2(n-1) + 1 \\
O(n) &= 4^n
\end{aligned}$

| Step | $P_1$ | $P_0$ | $P_2$ |
| :--: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| 0 | $[1:n]$ | $\emptyset$ | $\emptyset$ |
| 1 | $n$ | $\emptyset$ | $[1:n-1]$ |
| 2 | $n$ | $[1:n-1]$ | $\emptyset$ |
| 3 | $\emptyset$ | $[1:n-1]$ | $n$ |
| 4 | $[1:n-1]$ | $\emptyset$ | $n$ |
| 5 | $\emptyset$ | $\emptyset$ | $[1:n]$ |

***Correctness.*** Moves at the base case are
- $\text{src} \rightarrow \text{dst}$ (Steps 1, 5)
- $\text{dst} \rightarrow \text{tmp}$ (Step 2)
- $\text{tmp} \rightarrow \text{src}$ (Step 4)

All the moves are legal.

<br>

### **(c)** $O(2^n)$

$\text{Hanoi}_3(n, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \\
\qquad \text{if} \ n > 1  \quad // \ \text{The final plate will disappear by itself} \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}(n-1, \text{src}, \text{dst}, \text{tmp}) \quad // \ \text{Call the base algorithm} \\
\qquad \qquad // \ \text{The} \ n^{th} \ \text{plate on src disappears} \\
\qquad \qquad \text{Hanoi}_3(n-1, \text{dst}, \text{src}, \text{tmp})  \quad // \ \text{Swap src and dst, recurse}$

***Complexity***

$\begin{aligned}
S(n) &= 2 S(n-1) + 1 \quad // \ \text{Base algorithm} \\
&= 2^n - 1 \\
T_3(n) &= \sum_{k=1}^{n-1} S(k) \\
&= \sum_{k=1}^{n-1} 2^k - \sum_{k=1}^{n-1} 1 \\
&= 2^n - n - 1 \\
O(n) &= 2^n
\end{aligned}$

***Correctness.*** The intuition is to "toss" the upper plates back and forth between $P_1$ and $P_2$.
