# ECE374 SP23 HW6

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 5

**Expressions as Graphs.**

**(a)** Suppose an arithmetic expression is given as a tree. Each leaf is an integer and each internal node is one of the standard arithmetical operations (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`). Give an $O(n)$ algorithm for evaluating such an expression, where there are $n$ nodes in the tree.

**(b)** Suppose an arithmetic expression is given as a DAG with common subexpressions removed. Each leaf is an integer and each internal node is
one of the standard arithmetical operations (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`). Give an $O(n+m)$ algorithm for evaluating such a DAG with $n$ nodes and $m$ edges.

<br>

## Solution

*Example Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) parsing [algorithm](https://github.com/AllenHeartcore/ECE220_ZJUI21fa/blob/master/mp/mp11/ece220_parse.y) by [Steven S. Lumetta](http://lumetta.web.engr.illinois.edu)*

### **(a)**

$\text{EvalExpTree}(T) \\
\qquad \textbf{if } T \text{ is an operator} \\
\qquad \qquad a \gets \text{EvalExpTree}(T.\text{left}) \\
\qquad \qquad b \gets \text{EvalExpTree}(T.\text{right}) \\
\qquad \qquad \textbf{return } a \text{ } T \text{ } b \\
\qquad \textbf{else} \\
\qquad \qquad \textbf{return } T
$

This pseudocode is equivalent to using a stack to store the intermediate results.
- We initialize the stack by pushing the tree nodes in a **post-order** traversal.
- When we encounter an operator, we pop two operands, perform the operation, and push the result back.
- When we encounter an operand, we push it back.
- When we reach the base, the result is on the stack top.

Each node is visited once and pushed once, yielding time complexity of $O(n)$.

### **(b)**

$\text{EvalExpDAG}(G) \\
\qquad \textbf{if } G \text{ is an operator} \\
\qquad \qquad a \gets \text{EvalExpDAG}(G.\text{left}) \\
\qquad \qquad b \gets \text{EvalExpDAG}(G.\text{right}) \\
\qquad \qquad G \gets a \text{ } G \text{ } b \qquad \text{// } G \text{ is now an operand} \\
\qquad \textbf{return } G
$

We memoize intermediate results in DAG nodes. Each time the "value" of an **operator node** is evaluated, the node is overwritten with the result and becomes an **operand node**.

Each node is visited once, but requesting the memoized values still involves traversing all the edges. Total time complexity of $O(n+m)$.
