# ECE374 SP23 HW6

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 4

Plum blossom poles are a Kung Fu training technique, consisting of $n$ large posts partially sunk into the ground, with each pole $p_i$ at position $(x_i, y_i)$. Students practice martial arts techniques by stepping from the top of one pole to the top of another pole. In order to keep balance, each step must be more than $d$ meters but less than $2d$ meters.

Give an efficient algorithm to find a safe path from pole $p_s$ to $p_t$ if it exists.

<br>

## Solution

Let the list of poles be $P \in \R^{n \times 2}$. We construct a graph $G = (V, E)$ to describe the map, where $V = \{p_1, p_2, \dots, p_n\}$ are the poles and $E$ is the set of all eligible moves.

---

$\text{FindSafePath}(n, P, d, s, t) \\
\qquad G \gets \text{emptyGraph}() \\
\qquad \text{sort } P \text{ by } x_i \\
\qquad \textbf{for } i \gets 1 \text{ to } n \\
\qquad \qquad G.\text{addVertex}(p_i) \\
\qquad \textbf{for } i \gets 1 \text{ to } n \\
\qquad \qquad \textbf{for } j \gets i+1 \text{ to } n \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{if } x_j - x_i \ge 2d \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{break} \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \text{dist} \gets \sqrt{(x_i - x_j)^2 + (y_i - y_j)^2} \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{if } \text{dist} \in (d, 2d) \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad G.\text{addEdge}(p_i, p_j) \\
\qquad \textbf{return } \text{DFS}(G, s, t)
$

---

*Time complexity.*
- We choose DFS because the map is 2D. We may expect the graph to be sparse and contain lots of "chains."
- Constructing $G$ takes $O(n^2)$ time, but in practice this is a loose upper bound since the inner loop breaks early.
- DFS takes $O(n + m)$ time, where $m = \text{\#Edges} \le n^2$. Again, $m \approx n$ in our sparse case.
- Sorting $P$ takes $O(n \log n)$ time. Total complexity is $O(n^2)$ but can go as low as $O(n)$ for sorted input and sparse graphs.
