# ECE374 SP23 HW6

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 3

The traditional world chess championship is a match of 24 games. The current champion retains the title in case the match is a tie. Each game ends in a win, loss, or draw (tie) where wins count as $1$, losses as $0$, and draws as $\frac{1}{2}$.

The players take turns playing white and black. White plays first and has an advantage. The champion plays white in the first game. The champion has probabilities $ww$, $wd$, and $wl$ of winning, drawing, and losing
playing white, and has probabilities $bw$, $bd$, and $bl$ of winning, drawing, and losing playing black.

**(a)** Write a recurrence for the probability that the champion retains the title. Assume that there are $g$ games left to play in the match and that the champion needs to get $i$ points (which may be a multiple of $\frac{1}{2}$).

**(b)** Based on your recurrence, give a dynamic programming algorithm to calculate the champion's probability of retaining the title.

**(c)** Analyze its running time for an $n$-game match.

<br>

## Solution

### **(a)**

As a starting point, we assume that the champion plays white in the first game.

``` cpp
float ww, wd, wl, bw, bd, bl;	// given constants

float probability(int g, float i) {
	if (i > 0)
    	if (g > 0)
			if (g % 2 == 0)		// this condition may be revised
				return ww * probability(g-1, i-1)
					 + wd * probability(g-1, i-0.5)
					 + wl * probability(g-1, i);
			else
				return bw * probability(g-1, i-1)
					 + bd * probability(g-1, i-0.5)
					 + bl * probability(g-1, i);
        else
            return 0;			// chances used up
    else
        return 1;				// score cannot be negative
}
```

Since $i$ is discrete (must be a multiple of $\frac{1}{2}$), we can use a 2D array $M \in \R^{g \times 2i}$ to memoize the results of recursive calls. This is an important optimization concerning time complexity.

### **(b)**

The champion needs to take at least 12 points, so

``` cpp
p = probability(24, 12, ww, wd, wl, bw, bd, bl)
```

### **(c)**

Without memoization, time complexity can be illustrated as a tree:

```
             n
          /  |  \
      n-1   n-1   n-1
     / | \ / | \ / | \
```

Each node take $O(1)$ to compute, so total cost is $1 + 3 + \ldots + 3^n = O(3^n)$

But with memoization, we can optimize the time complexity to $O(n^2)$, or $O(gi)$ where $g = n$ and $i = 2n$.
