# ECE374 SP23 HW8

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 4

SAT reductions.

**(a)** **Stingy SAT.** Given a set of clauses (each a disjunction of
literals) and an integer $k$, find a satisfying assignment in which *at most* $k$ variables are $\text{True}$, if such an assignment exists. Prove that *Stingy SAT* is NP-hard.

**(b)** **Double SAT.** The problem asks whether a given satisfiability problem has *at least* two different satisfying assignments. Prove that *Double SAT* is NP-hard.

<br>

## Solution

### **(a)**

To prove that *Stingy SAT* is NP-hard, we need to (1) prove that *Stingy SAT* is an NP problem, and (2) reduce the SAT problem to a *Stingy SAT* problem.

**Pre-condition.** Let $(F, k)$ be an instance of *Stingy SAT*, where $F$ is an instance of SAT with $k$ variables. We need to show that a set of assignments $X$ can make $(F, k)$ a real solution in polynomial time, which proves that *Stingy SAT* is an NP problem.

**Target.** We need to create a certificate that converts SAT to *Stingy SAT*, i.e., $X$ is the solution of $F$ if and only if $X$ is the solution of $(F, k)$. $\text{SAT} \Leftrightarrow \text{Stingy SAT}$.

**Proof of adequacy.** If $X$ is the solution of $F$, then at most $k$ variables are $\text{True}$ in $X$. Therefore, $X$ satisfies $(F, k)$, which means $X$ is the solution of $(F, k)$.

**Proof of necessity.** Assuming $X$ is the solution of $(F, k)$, it implies that $X$ assigns at most $k$ variables to $\text{True}$, and also satisfies $F$. Hence, $X$ is the solution of $F$. $\blacksquare$

### **(b)**

We can demonstrate that *Double SAT* is NP-hard by providing a reduction from SAT. Given an instance $\phi$ of SAT, which is a CNF formula containing $n$ variables $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$, we construct a new variable $x_{n+1}$. We then define $\psi = \phi ∧ (x_{n+1} ∨ ¬x_{n+1})$ as the corresponding instance of *Double SAT*.

We claim that $\phi$ has a satisfying assignment (is an instance of SAT) if and only if $\psi$ has at least two satisfying assignments (is an instance of *Double SAT*).

**If.** If $\phi$ has a satisfying assignment $f$, we can obtain two distinct satisfying assignments for $\psi$ by extending $f$ with $x_{n+1} = \text{True}$ and $x_{n+1} = \text{False}$, respectively.

**Only if.** On the other hand, if $\psi$ has at least two satisfying assignments, then the restriction of any of them to the set ${x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n}$ is a satisfying assignment for $\phi$. $\blacksquare$
