# ECE374 SP23 HW8

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 3

**The low-degree spanning tree problem.** Given a graph $G$ and an integer $k$, does $G$ contain a spanning tree such that all vertices in the tree have degree *at most* $k$?

**(a)** Prove that the low-degree spanning tree problem is NP-hard with a reduction from Hamiltonian path.

**(b)** Consider **the high-degree spanning tree problem.** Given a graph $G$ and an integer $k$, does $G$ contain a spanning tree whose highest degree vertex is *at least* $k$? Give an efficient algorithm to solve this problem and analyze its time complexity.

<br>

## Solution

*(Adapted from the solution to Problem 3, Lab 20)*

### **(a)**

We prove the **low-degree spanning tree problem** is NP-hard by a reduction from the **undirected Hamiltonian path problem**.

Given an arbitrary graph $G$, let $H$ be the graph obtained by attaching a "fan" of $k - 2$ edges (with $k - 2$ new vertices) to every vertex of $G$. I claim that $G$ has a Hamiltonian path if and only if $H$ has a low-degree spanning tree.

---

**If.** Suppose $G$ has a Hamiltonian path $P$.
- Let $T$ be the spanning tree of $H$ obtained by adding every "fan edge" in $H$ to $P$.
- Every vertex $v \in H$ is either a leaf of $T$ or a vertex of $P$.
- If $v \in P$, then $\text{deg}_P(v) \le 2$, and therefore $\text{deg}_T(v) = \text{deg}_P(v) + (k-2) \le k$.

We conclude that $H$ has a low-degree spanning tree.

---

**Only if.** Suppose $H$ has a low-degree spanning tree $T$.
- The leaves $l$ of $T$ are the vertices of $H$ with degree $1$, and $l \in H - G$.
- Let $P$ be the subtree of $T$ obtained by deleting all the leaves.
- $P$ is a spanning tree of $G$, and for every vertex $v \in P$, we
have $\text{deg}_P(v) = \text{deg}_T(v) - (k-2) \le 2$.

We conclude that $P$ is a Hamiltonian path in $G$. $\ \blacksquare$

---

*(Page 3 of this [source](https://www.csc.kth.se/utbildning/kth/kurser/DD2354/algokomp10/Ovningar/Exercise6_Sol.pdf) provides another proof without constructing the "fan." $k$ is assumed to be greater than 2.)*

We claim that $G$ has a Hamiltonian path if and only if it has a spanning tree with vertex degree *at most* 2.

**If.** If $G$ contains a Hamiltonian path, this path must be a spanning tree since the path visits every node, and a path trivially is a tree.

**Only if.** It is easy to see that such a spanning tree is a Hamiltonian path. Since it has degree *at most* 2, it cannot branch; since it is spanning, only two vertices can have degree < 2. $\ \blacksquare$

### **(b)**

*Pseudocode.*
- Count the degree of each vertex in $G$.
- If all vertices have degrees *lower than* $k$, return $\text{False}$.
- Select any vertex $v$ with degree *higher than* $k$ as the root of the high-degree spanning tree. Include all edges incident to $v$ in the tree.
- Perform a depth-first search on $G$ starting at $v$ and its children.
- Check if all vertices have been visited (in case there are multiple connected components). If so, return $\text{True}$.

*Runtime analysis.* Checking the degrees takes $O(n)$ time. The DFS takes $O(n)$ time. Total runtime is $O(n)$.
