# ECE374 SP23 HW3

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 4

An all-NFA $M$ is a 5-tuple $(Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$ that accepts $x \in \Sigma^*$ if **every** possible state that $M$ could be in after reading input $x$ is a state from $F$, in contrast to an ordinary NFA that accepts a string if **some** state among these possible states is an accept state.

Prove that all-NFAs recognize the class of regular languages.

<br>

## Solution

**Proof.** We prove that a language is regular *iff* it can be represented by an all-NFA.

---

*If.* Any DFA represents a regular language. Then it suffices to show the transformation from an all-NFA to a DFA.

Given a typical NFA $N = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, s, F)$, we can transform it into a DFA

$$ D = (Q', \Sigma, \delta', s', F') $$

where
- $Q' = P(Q)$
- $\delta'(X, a) = \underset{q \in X}{\bigcup} \delta(q, a), \forall X \subseteq Q, a \in \Sigma$
- $s' = \epsilon \textrm{-reach}(s) = \delta^*(s, \epsilon)$
- $F' = \{X \subseteq Q \mid X \cap F \neq \emptyset\}$

The four equations above also apply to the transformation of an all-NFA, *except* for $F'$ which must be redefined as

$$ F' = \{X \subseteq Q \mid X \subseteq F \textrm{ and } X \neq \emptyset\} $$

$X$ must be (1) non-empty and (2) a subset of $F$. This corresponds to the definition of an all-NFA that **every** possible ending state should be an accept state.

We have proven that any all-NFA represents a regular language.

---

*Only if.* Any regular language can be represented by a DFA.

An interesting observation is that a DFA ***itself is*** an all-NFA: a string $x$ is accepted if "every possible" state a DFA could be in after reading $x$ is an accept state. There is in fact only one such state -- the machine is deterministic!

We have proven that any regular language can be represented by an all-NFA. **Q.E.D.**
