# ECE374 SP23 HW5

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 5

A certain string processing language allows the programmer to break a string into two pieces. It costs $n$ units of time to break a string of $n$ characters into two pieces, since this involves copying the old string.

A programmer wants to break a string into many pieces, and the order in which the breaks are made can affect the total amount of time used. Give a dynamic programming algorithm that takes a list of character positions after
which to break and determines the cheapest break cost in $O(n^3)$ time.

<br>

## Solution

*Preprocessing.* Assume the string $s$ has length $n$ and the array of breaking points $B$ has length $m$. After breaking, the string is divided into

$$s[0 : B[0]], \quad s[B[0] + 1 : B[1]], \quad \ldots, \quad s[B[m-1] + 1 : n-1]$$

For convenient indexing, we add $-1$ to the beginning and $n-1$ to the end of the breaking array. Now $B$ becomes

$$\{-1, \quad B[0], \quad \ldots, \quad B[m - 1], \quad n-1\}$$

and each subarray has a unified representation of $s[B[i] + 1 : B[i + 1]], 0 \le i \le m$.

---

*Recurrence function.* Let $cost(i, j)$ represents the breaking cost from point $i$ to point $j$. This function is only defined when $i < j$. Obviously $cost(i, i+1) = 0$ since the substring need not to be cut.

$$ cost(i, j) = \begin{cases} 0 & j = i + 1 \\ \underset{i \lt k \lt j}{\min} \left( cost(i, k) + cost(k, j) + B(j) - B(i) \right) & \text{otherwise} \end{cases} $$

The intuition is that we iterate $k$ between $(i, j)$ and find the breaking point with minimal cost. The algorithm outputs $cost(0, m+1)$ as the final answer.

*Time complexity.* The time complexity is $O(n^3)$ since there are $n^2$ states (we are filling out a $m \times m$ DP matrix) and each takes $O(n)$ time to compute (there's an iteration).

---

*Pseudocode.*

$
\text{BreakString}(s, B) \\
\qquad n \leftarrow \text{len}(s) \\
\qquad m \leftarrow \text{len}(B) \\
\qquad B.\text{pushFront}(-1) \quad \text{ // make } B \text{ 0-indexed} \\
\qquad B.\text{pushBack}(n-1) \\
\qquad cost \leftarrow -1 \times \text{MatrixOfOnes}(m + 2, m + 2) \\
\qquad \textbf{for } i \leftarrow 0 \text{ to } m+1 \\
\qquad \qquad cost(i, i+1) \leftarrow 0 \\
\qquad \textbf{for } i \leftarrow 0 \text{ to } m \\
\qquad \qquad \text{for } j \leftarrow i+2 \text{ to } m+2 \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \text{MinCost} \leftarrow \infty \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{for } k \leftarrow i+1 \text{ to } j-1 \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \text{ThisCost} \leftarrow cost(i, k) + cost(k, j) + B(j) - B(i) \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{if }(\text{ThisCost} < \text{MinCost}) \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad \text{MinCost} \leftarrow \text{ThisCost} \\
\qquad \qquad \qquad cost(i, j) \leftarrow \text{MinCost} \\
\qquad \textbf{return }cost(0, m+1)
$
