# ECE374 SP23 HW5

## Contributors

Zhirong Chen (zhirong4)

Ziyuan Chen (ziyuanc3)

<br>

## Problem 4

**(a)** Given an array $A$ of $n$ integers, find an efficient algorithm to compute the largest sum of a continuous run.

**(b)** Now assume that there are $n$ numbers (some possibly negative) on a circle, and we wish to find the maximum contiguous sum along an arc of the circle. Give an efficient algorithm for solving this problem.

<br>

## Solution

### **(a)**

*Recurrence relation.* For the given array $A[0 \ldots n-1]$, we define $S[i]$ as the largest sum of a continuous run that ends at $A[i]$:

$$S[i] = \begin{cases} A[0] & i = 0 \\ A[i] & i > 0 \text{ and } S[i-1] \leq 0 \\ S[i-1] + A[i] & i > 0 \text{ and } S[i-1] > 0 \end{cases}$$

*Memoization.* We fill out the memoized array $S$ from left to right. Starting from $S[0] = A[0]$, we start a new continuous run at $A[i]$ if $S[i-1] \leq 0$ (which means there's no point in including the previous run). Otherwise, we extend the previous run by adding $A[i]$ to $S[i-1]$. The final answer is $\max_{i} S[i]$.

*Time complexity.* We fill out the linear $S$ in $O(n)$ time. Locating the maximum value (a single scan) takes another $O(n)$. The total time complexity is $O(n)$.

### **(b)**

We extend the solution to **(a)** to the circular case by simply concatenating a copy of the array with itself, or

$$A[i] = \begin{cases} A[i] & i < n \\ A[i-n] & i \geq n \end{cases}, \quad 0 \leq i < 2n$$

Any continuous run that covers the sequence $\{\ldots, A[n-1], A[n], \ldots\}$ indicates that the optimal continuous run is "wrapped around" at the end of the original linear array.

Consequently, the length of $S[0 \ldots 2n-1]$ is also doubled. The algorithm for **(a)** still works, except that the time complexity is now $O(2n) = O(n)$.
